NotesFAQContact Us Collection Thesaurus AdvancedSearch Tips Peer reviewed only Full text available on ERIC Collection Thesaurus BrowseThesaurus Include Synonyms Include Dead terms Peer reviewed Download full textERIC Number: EJ1323085Record Type: JournalPublication Date: 2021Pages: 15Abstractor: As ProvidedISBN: N/AISSN: ISSN-1052-3073EISSN: N/AFinancial Debt and Mental Health of Young AdultsKim, Jinhee; Chatterjee, SwarnJournal of Financial Counseling and Planning, v32 n2 p187-201 2021The purpose of this study is to examine the debt burdens, perceived capabilities, and mental health of young adults. Panel data constructed from the 2009 to 2013 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and its Transition to Adulthood (TA) supplement are used in this study. The multinomial logistic regression analysis findings showed that the amount of revolving debt was negatively associated with young adults' mental health. On the other hand, perceived abilities in acting responsibly, in solving problems, and in managing money were positively associated with the mental health of young adults. The fixed effects regression analysis results indicate that the amounts of credit card and student loan debt from the previous period were negatively associated with an increase in the mental health continuum scores of young adults over time. A discussion of the implications of this study's key findings for scholars, policymakers, and practitioners is included.Descriptors: Debt (Financial), Mental Health, Correlation, Young Adults, Developmental Stages, Developmental Tasks, Problem Solving, Money Management, Student Financial Aid, Scores, Well Being, Longitudinal Studies, Gender Differences, Parent Child Relationship, Self Concept, Educational Attainment, Higher Education, Race, EthnicityAssociation for Financial Counseling and Planning Education. 1500 West Third Avenue Suite 223, Columbus, OH 43212. Tel: 614-485-9650; Fax: 614-485-9621; Web site: https://connect.springerpub.com/content/sgrjfcpPublication Type: Journal Articles; Reports - ResearchEducation Level: Higher Education; Postsecondary EducationAudience: N/ALanguage: EnglishSponsor: N/AAuthoring Institution: N/AGrant or Contract Numbers: N/A Privacy | Copyright | Contact Us | Selection Policy | API | MetricsJournals | Non-Journals | Download | Submit | Multimedia | Widget
Collection Thesaurus AdvancedSearch Tips Peer reviewed only Full text available on ERIC Collection Thesaurus BrowseThesaurus Include Synonyms Include Dead terms
Collection Thesaurus AdvancedSearch Tips
Peer reviewed only Full text available on ERIC
Collection Thesaurus BrowseThesaurus
Include Synonyms Include Dead terms
Peer reviewed Download full textERIC Number: EJ1323085Record Type: JournalPublication Date: 2021Pages: 15Abstractor: As ProvidedISBN: N/AISSN: ISSN-1052-3073EISSN: N/AFinancial Debt and Mental Health of Young AdultsKim, Jinhee; Chatterjee, SwarnJournal of Financial Counseling and Planning, v32 n2 p187-201 2021The purpose of this study is to examine the debt burdens, perceived capabilities, and mental health of young adults. Panel data constructed from the 2009 to 2013 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and its Transition to Adulthood (TA) supplement are used in this study. The multinomial logistic regression analysis findings showed that the amount of revolving debt was negatively associated with young adults' mental health. On the other hand, perceived abilities in acting responsibly, in solving problems, and in managing money were positively associated with the mental health of young adults. The fixed effects regression analysis results indicate that the amounts of credit card and student loan debt from the previous period were negatively associated with an increase in the mental health continuum scores of young adults over time. A discussion of the implications of this study's key findings for scholars, policymakers, and practitioners is included.Descriptors: Debt (Financial), Mental Health, Correlation, Young Adults, Developmental Stages, Developmental Tasks, Problem Solving, Money Management, Student Financial Aid, Scores, Well Being, Longitudinal Studies, Gender Differences, Parent Child Relationship, Self Concept, Educational Attainment, Higher Education, Race, EthnicityAssociation for Financial Counseling and Planning Education. 1500 West Third Avenue Suite 223, Columbus, OH 43212. Tel: 614-485-9650; Fax: 614-485-9621; Web site: https://connect.springerpub.com/content/sgrjfcpPublication Type: Journal Articles; Reports - ResearchEducation Level: Higher Education; Postsecondary EducationAudience: N/ALanguage: EnglishSponsor: N/AAuthoring Institution: N/AGrant or Contract Numbers: N/A
Peer reviewed Download full textERIC Number: EJ1323085Record Type: JournalPublication Date: 2021Pages: 15Abstractor: As ProvidedISBN: N/AISSN: ISSN-1052-3073EISSN: N/AFinancial Debt and Mental Health of Young AdultsKim, Jinhee; Chatterjee, SwarnJournal of Financial Counseling and Planning, v32 n2 p187-201 2021The purpose of this study is to examine the debt burdens, perceived capabilities, and mental health of young adults. Panel data constructed from the 2009 to 2013 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and its Transition to Adulthood (TA) supplement are used in this study. The multinomial logistic regression analysis findings showed that the amount of revolving debt was negatively associated with young adults' mental health. On the other hand, perceived abilities in acting responsibly, in solving problems, and in managing money were positively associated with the mental health of young adults. The fixed effects regression analysis results indicate that the amounts of credit card and student loan debt from the previous period were negatively associated with an increase in the mental health continuum scores of young adults over time. A discussion of the implications of this study's key findings for scholars, policymakers, and practitioners is included.Descriptors: Debt (Financial), Mental Health, Correlation, Young Adults, Developmental Stages, Developmental Tasks, Problem Solving, Money Management, Student Financial Aid, Scores, Well Being, Longitudinal Studies, Gender Differences, Parent Child Relationship, Self Concept, Educational Attainment, Higher Education, Race, EthnicityAssociation for Financial Counseling and Planning Education. 1500 West Third Avenue Suite 223, Columbus, OH 43212. Tel: 614-485-9650; Fax: 614-485-9621; Web site: https://connect.springerpub.com/content/sgrjfcpPublication Type: Journal Articles; Reports - ResearchEducation Level: Higher Education; Postsecondary EducationAudience: N/ALanguage: EnglishSponsor: N/AAuthoring Institution: N/AGrant or Contract Numbers: N/A
Peer reviewed Download full textERIC Number: EJ1323085Record Type: JournalPublication Date: 2021Pages: 15Abstractor: As ProvidedISBN: N/AISSN: ISSN-1052-3073EISSN: N/A
Peer reviewed Download full text
ERIC Number: EJ1323085Record Type: JournalPublication Date: 2021Pages: 15Abstractor: As ProvidedISBN: N/AISSN: ISSN-1052-3073EISSN: N/A
ERIC Number: EJ1323085
Record Type: Journal
Publication Date: 2021
Abstractor: As Provided
Financial Debt and Mental Health of Young Adults
Kim, Jinhee; Chatterjee, SwarnJournal of Financial Counseling and Planning, v32 n2 p187-201 2021
Kim, Jinhee; Chatterjee, Swarn
Journal of Financial Counseling and Planning, v32 n2 p187-201 2021
The purpose of this study is to examine the debt burdens, perceived capabilities, and mental health of young adults. Panel data constructed from the 2009 to 2013 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and its Transition to Adulthood (TA) supplement are used in this study. The multinomial logistic regression analysis findings showed that the amount of revolving debt was negatively associated with young adults' mental health. On the other hand, perceived abilities in acting responsibly, in solving problems, and in managing money were positively associated with the mental health of young adults. The fixed effects regression analysis results indicate that the amounts of credit card and student loan debt from the previous period were negatively associated with an increase in the mental health continuum scores of young adults over time. A discussion of the implications of this study's key findings for scholars, policymakers, and practitioners is included.Descriptors: Debt (Financial), Mental Health, Correlation, Young Adults, Developmental Stages, Developmental Tasks, Problem Solving, Money Management, Student Financial Aid, Scores, Well Being, Longitudinal Studies, Gender Differences, Parent Child Relationship, Self Concept, Educational Attainment, Higher Education, Race, EthnicityAssociation for Financial Counseling and Planning Education. 1500 West Third Avenue Suite 223, Columbus, OH 43212. Tel: 614-485-9650; Fax: 614-485-9621; Web site: https://connect.springerpub.com/content/sgrjfcp
The purpose of this study is to examine the debt burdens, perceived capabilities, and mental health of young adults. Panel data constructed from the 2009 to 2013 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and its Transition to Adulthood (TA) supplement are used in this study. The multinomial logistic regression analysis findings showed that the amount of revolving debt was negatively associated with young adults' mental health. On the other hand, perceived abilities in acting responsibly, in solving problems, and in managing money were positively associated with the mental health of young adults. The fixed effects regression analysis results indicate that the amounts of credit card and student loan debt from the previous period were negatively associated with an increase in the mental health continuum scores of young adults over time. A discussion of the implications of this study's key findings for scholars, policymakers, and practitioners is included.Descriptors: Debt (Financial), Mental Health, Correlation, Young Adults, Developmental Stages, Developmental Tasks, Problem Solving, Money Management, Student Financial Aid, Scores, Well Being, Longitudinal Studies, Gender Differences, Parent Child Relationship, Self Concept, Educational Attainment, Higher Education, Race, EthnicityAssociation for Financial Counseling and Planning Education. 1500 West Third Avenue Suite 223, Columbus, OH 43212. Tel: 614-485-9650; Fax: 614-485-9621; Web site: https://connect.springerpub.com/content/sgrjfcp
The purpose of this study is to examine the debt burdens, perceived capabilities, and mental health of young adults. Panel data constructed from the 2009 to 2013 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and its Transition to Adulthood (TA) supplement are used in this study. The multinomial logistic regression analysis findings showed that the amount of revolving debt was negatively associated with young adults' mental health. On the other hand, perceived abilities in acting responsibly, in solving problems, and in managing money were positively associated with the mental health of young adults. The fixed effects regression analysis results indicate that the amounts of credit card and student loan debt from the previous period were negatively associated with an increase in the mental health continuum scores of young adults over time. A discussion of the implications of this study's key findings for scholars, policymakers, and practitioners is included.
Descriptors: Debt (Financial), Mental Health, Correlation, Young Adults, Developmental Stages, Developmental Tasks, Problem Solving, Money Management, Student Financial Aid, Scores, Well Being, Longitudinal Studies, Gender Differences, Parent Child Relationship, Self Concept, Educational Attainment, Higher Education, Race, Ethnicity
Association for Financial Counseling and Planning Education. 1500 West Third Avenue Suite 223, Columbus, OH 43212. Tel: 614-485-9650; Fax: 614-485-9621; Web site: https://connect.springerpub.com/content/sgrjfcp
Publication Type: Journal Articles; Reports - ResearchEducation Level: Higher Education; Postsecondary EducationAudience: N/ALanguage: EnglishSponsor: N/AAuthoring Institution: N/AGrant or Contract Numbers: N/A
Publication Type: Journal Articles; Reports - ResearchEducation Level: Higher Education; Postsecondary EducationAudience: N/ALanguage: EnglishSponsor: N/AAuthoring Institution: N/AGrant or Contract Numbers: N/A
Publication Type: Journal Articles; Reports - Research
Education Level: Higher Education; Postsecondary Education
Authoring Institution: N/A
Grant or Contract Numbers: N/A
Privacy | Copyright | Contact Us | Selection Policy | API | MetricsJournals | Non-Journals | Download | Submit | Multimedia | Widget
Privacy | Copyright | Contact Us | Selection Policy | API | MetricsJournals | Non-Journals | Download | Submit | Multimedia | Widget
Privacy | Copyright | Contact Us | Selection Policy | API | MetricsJournals | Non-Journals | Download | Submit | Multimedia | Widget
Privacy | Copyright | Contact Us | Selection Policy | API | MetricsJournals | Non-Journals | Download | Submit | Multimedia | Widget
Journals | Non-Journals | Download | Submit | Multimedia | Widget