MedicalCRITERIA.com Unifying Concepts
MedicalCRITERIA.com Unifying Concepts
MedicalCRITERIA.com Unifying Concepts
Menu Home Home Contact us About Us Criteria Register Register Login Account Logout App MC
Menu Home Home Contact us About Us Criteria Register Register Login Account Logout App MC
Home Home Contact us About Us Criteria Register Register Login Account Logout App MC
Home Home Contact us About Us
Home Contact us About Us
Register Register Login Account Logout
Register Login Account Logout
DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Schizophrenia 13 December, 2019 Guillermo Firman Schizophrenia is a psychiatric syndrome characterized by psychotic symptoms of hallucinations, delusions, and disorganized speech, by negative symptoms such as decreased motivation and diminished expressiveness, and by cognitive deficits involving impaired executive functions, memory, and speed of mental processing.The specific DSM-5 criteria for schizophrenia are as follows: The presence of at least two of the following five items, each present for a clinically significant portion of time during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated), with at least one of them being items 1), 2), or 3): 1) delusions, 2) hallucinations, 3) disorganized speech, 4) grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior, and 5) negative symptoms (e.g., decreased motivation and diminished expressiveness). For a clinically significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, the level of functioning in one or more major areas (e.g., work, interpersonal relations, or self-care) is markedly below the level achieved before onset; when the onset is in childhood or adolescence, the expected level of interpersonal, academic, or occupational functioning is not achieved. Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for a period of at least 6 months, which must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated); prodromal symptoms often precede the active phase, and residual symptoms may follow it, characterized by mild or subthreshold forms of hallucinations or delusions. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features have been ruled out because either no major depressive, manic, or mixed episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms or any mood episodes that have occurred during active-phase symptoms have been present for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse or a medication) or another medical condition. If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication disorder of childhood onset, the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if prominent delusions or hallucinations, in addition to the other required symptoms or schizophrenia, are also present for at least 1 month (or less if successfully treated). In addition to the symptom domain areas identified in the first diagnostic criterion, assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for distinguishing between schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders. References: Marder SR, Cannon TD. Schizophrenia. N Engl J Med. 2019;381(18):1753-1761. [Medline] Agarwal V, Maheshwari S, Agarwal V, Kalra ID. Simple Schizophrenia Remains a Complicated Diagnosis: Case Report and Literature Review. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2016;204(1):57-60. [Medline] Created Dec 09, 2019. Related Posts DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Anorexia NervosaA. Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weight for age… DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Alcohol DependenceA maladaptive pattern of alcohol use, leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested… Diagnostic Criteria for Tuberculosis DiseaseDefinite diagnosis Clinical picture consistent with tuberculosis; bacteriologic confirmation (culture, gene probe/NAA + AFB smear);… DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Major Depressive DisorderThe diagnostic criteria for major depression in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,… DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Panic AttackA discrete period of intense fear or discomfort, in which four (or more) of the… Posted in Psychiatry Tags: Criteria, criterios, Diagnostic, diagnostico, DSM, DSM-5, Esquizofrenia, Schizophrenia Language: Español English Users Online165 Users OnlineSearch Search for Medical DisclaimerEl contenido de este sitio web son solo para fines informativos y no reemplazan la consulta con un profesional médico. Recent Posts Red Flags in Headache Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) Scale Rosemont Criteria for Chronic Pancreatitis Diagnostic Criteria for Idiopathic Multicentric Castleman Disease (iMCD) Diagnostic Criteria of Lipedema Categories About Us (1) Criteria (635) Allergy (3) Anesthesiology (5) Cardiology (55) Critical Care (17) Dermatology (7) Diabetes (14) Endocrinology and Metabolism (21) Epidemiology (6) Family Practice (7) Gastroenterology (64) Hematology (41) Immumology (6) Infectious Disease (44) Internal Medicine (1) Nephrology (17) Neurology (81) Nutrition (30) Obstetrics & Gynecology (21) Oncology (13) Ophthalmology (4) Orthopedic (5) Otolaryngology (5) Pathologic (1) Pediatrics (14) Pharmacology (3) Physical Therapists (7) Psychiatry (51) Pulmonary (23) Radiology (5) Rheumatology (52) Surgery (8) Urology (5) Links (6)
DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Schizophrenia 13 December, 2019 Guillermo Firman Schizophrenia is a psychiatric syndrome characterized by psychotic symptoms of hallucinations, delusions, and disorganized speech, by negative symptoms such as decreased motivation and diminished expressiveness, and by cognitive deficits involving impaired executive functions, memory, and speed of mental processing.The specific DSM-5 criteria for schizophrenia are as follows: The presence of at least two of the following five items, each present for a clinically significant portion of time during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated), with at least one of them being items 1), 2), or 3): 1) delusions, 2) hallucinations, 3) disorganized speech, 4) grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior, and 5) negative symptoms (e.g., decreased motivation and diminished expressiveness). For a clinically significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, the level of functioning in one or more major areas (e.g., work, interpersonal relations, or self-care) is markedly below the level achieved before onset; when the onset is in childhood or adolescence, the expected level of interpersonal, academic, or occupational functioning is not achieved. Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for a period of at least 6 months, which must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated); prodromal symptoms often precede the active phase, and residual symptoms may follow it, characterized by mild or subthreshold forms of hallucinations or delusions. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features have been ruled out because either no major depressive, manic, or mixed episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms or any mood episodes that have occurred during active-phase symptoms have been present for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse or a medication) or another medical condition. If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication disorder of childhood onset, the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if prominent delusions or hallucinations, in addition to the other required symptoms or schizophrenia, are also present for at least 1 month (or less if successfully treated). In addition to the symptom domain areas identified in the first diagnostic criterion, assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for distinguishing between schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders. References: Marder SR, Cannon TD. Schizophrenia. N Engl J Med. 2019;381(18):1753-1761. [Medline] Agarwal V, Maheshwari S, Agarwal V, Kalra ID. Simple Schizophrenia Remains a Complicated Diagnosis: Case Report and Literature Review. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2016;204(1):57-60. [Medline] Created Dec 09, 2019. Related Posts DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Anorexia NervosaA. Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weight for age… DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Alcohol DependenceA maladaptive pattern of alcohol use, leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested… Diagnostic Criteria for Tuberculosis DiseaseDefinite diagnosis Clinical picture consistent with tuberculosis; bacteriologic confirmation (culture, gene probe/NAA + AFB smear);… DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Major Depressive DisorderThe diagnostic criteria for major depression in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,… DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Panic AttackA discrete period of intense fear or discomfort, in which four (or more) of the… Posted in Psychiatry Tags: Criteria, criterios, Diagnostic, diagnostico, DSM, DSM-5, Esquizofrenia, Schizophrenia Language: Español English Users Online165 Users OnlineSearch Search for Medical DisclaimerEl contenido de este sitio web son solo para fines informativos y no reemplazan la consulta con un profesional médico. Recent Posts Red Flags in Headache Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) Scale Rosemont Criteria for Chronic Pancreatitis Diagnostic Criteria for Idiopathic Multicentric Castleman Disease (iMCD) Diagnostic Criteria of Lipedema Categories About Us (1) Criteria (635) Allergy (3) Anesthesiology (5) Cardiology (55) Critical Care (17) Dermatology (7) Diabetes (14) Endocrinology and Metabolism (21) Epidemiology (6) Family Practice (7) Gastroenterology (64) Hematology (41) Immumology (6) Infectious Disease (44) Internal Medicine (1) Nephrology (17) Neurology (81) Nutrition (30) Obstetrics & Gynecology (21) Oncology (13) Ophthalmology (4) Orthopedic (5) Otolaryngology (5) Pathologic (1) Pediatrics (14) Pharmacology (3) Physical Therapists (7) Psychiatry (51) Pulmonary (23) Radiology (5) Rheumatology (52) Surgery (8) Urology (5) Links (6)
DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Schizophrenia 13 December, 2019 Guillermo Firman Schizophrenia is a psychiatric syndrome characterized by psychotic symptoms of hallucinations, delusions, and disorganized speech, by negative symptoms such as decreased motivation and diminished expressiveness, and by cognitive deficits involving impaired executive functions, memory, and speed of mental processing.The specific DSM-5 criteria for schizophrenia are as follows: The presence of at least two of the following five items, each present for a clinically significant portion of time during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated), with at least one of them being items 1), 2), or 3): 1) delusions, 2) hallucinations, 3) disorganized speech, 4) grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior, and 5) negative symptoms (e.g., decreased motivation and diminished expressiveness). For a clinically significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, the level of functioning in one or more major areas (e.g., work, interpersonal relations, or self-care) is markedly below the level achieved before onset; when the onset is in childhood or adolescence, the expected level of interpersonal, academic, or occupational functioning is not achieved. Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for a period of at least 6 months, which must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated); prodromal symptoms often precede the active phase, and residual symptoms may follow it, characterized by mild or subthreshold forms of hallucinations or delusions. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features have been ruled out because either no major depressive, manic, or mixed episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms or any mood episodes that have occurred during active-phase symptoms have been present for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse or a medication) or another medical condition. If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication disorder of childhood onset, the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if prominent delusions or hallucinations, in addition to the other required symptoms or schizophrenia, are also present for at least 1 month (or less if successfully treated). In addition to the symptom domain areas identified in the first diagnostic criterion, assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for distinguishing between schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders. References: Marder SR, Cannon TD. Schizophrenia. N Engl J Med. 2019;381(18):1753-1761. [Medline] Agarwal V, Maheshwari S, Agarwal V, Kalra ID. Simple Schizophrenia Remains a Complicated Diagnosis: Case Report and Literature Review. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2016;204(1):57-60. [Medline] Created Dec 09, 2019. Related Posts DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Anorexia NervosaA. Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weight for age… DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Alcohol DependenceA maladaptive pattern of alcohol use, leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested… Diagnostic Criteria for Tuberculosis DiseaseDefinite diagnosis Clinical picture consistent with tuberculosis; bacteriologic confirmation (culture, gene probe/NAA + AFB smear);… DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Major Depressive DisorderThe diagnostic criteria for major depression in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,… DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Panic AttackA discrete period of intense fear or discomfort, in which four (or more) of the… Posted in Psychiatry Tags: Criteria, criterios, Diagnostic, diagnostico, DSM, DSM-5, Esquizofrenia, Schizophrenia
DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Schizophrenia
13 December, 2019 Guillermo Firman
13 December, 2019 Guillermo Firman
13 December, 2019 Guillermo Firman
13 December, 2019
Schizophrenia is a psychiatric syndrome characterized by psychotic symptoms of hallucinations, delusions, and disorganized speech, by negative symptoms such as decreased motivation and diminished expressiveness, and by cognitive deficits involving impaired executive functions, memory, and speed of mental processing.The specific DSM-5 criteria for schizophrenia are as follows: The presence of at least two of the following five items, each present for a clinically significant portion of time during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated), with at least one of them being items 1), 2), or 3): 1) delusions, 2) hallucinations, 3) disorganized speech, 4) grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior, and 5) negative symptoms (e.g., decreased motivation and diminished expressiveness). For a clinically significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, the level of functioning in one or more major areas (e.g., work, interpersonal relations, or self-care) is markedly below the level achieved before onset; when the onset is in childhood or adolescence, the expected level of interpersonal, academic, or occupational functioning is not achieved. Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for a period of at least 6 months, which must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated); prodromal symptoms often precede the active phase, and residual symptoms may follow it, characterized by mild or subthreshold forms of hallucinations or delusions. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features have been ruled out because either no major depressive, manic, or mixed episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms or any mood episodes that have occurred during active-phase symptoms have been present for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse or a medication) or another medical condition. If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication disorder of childhood onset, the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if prominent delusions or hallucinations, in addition to the other required symptoms or schizophrenia, are also present for at least 1 month (or less if successfully treated). In addition to the symptom domain areas identified in the first diagnostic criterion, assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for distinguishing between schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders. References: Marder SR, Cannon TD. Schizophrenia. N Engl J Med. 2019;381(18):1753-1761. [Medline] Agarwal V, Maheshwari S, Agarwal V, Kalra ID. Simple Schizophrenia Remains a Complicated Diagnosis: Case Report and Literature Review. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2016;204(1):57-60. [Medline] Created Dec 09, 2019. Related Posts DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Anorexia NervosaA. Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weight for age… DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Alcohol DependenceA maladaptive pattern of alcohol use, leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested… Diagnostic Criteria for Tuberculosis DiseaseDefinite diagnosis Clinical picture consistent with tuberculosis; bacteriologic confirmation (culture, gene probe/NAA + AFB smear);… DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Major Depressive DisorderThe diagnostic criteria for major depression in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,… DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Panic AttackA discrete period of intense fear or discomfort, in which four (or more) of the…
Schizophrenia is a psychiatric syndrome characterized by psychotic symptoms of hallucinations, delusions, and disorganized speech, by negative symptoms such as decreased motivation and diminished expressiveness, and by cognitive deficits involving impaired executive functions, memory, and speed of mental processing.The specific DSM-5 criteria for schizophrenia are as follows:
The presence of at least two of the following five items, each present for a clinically significant portion of time during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated), with at least one of them being items 1), 2), or 3): 1) delusions, 2) hallucinations, 3) disorganized speech, 4) grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior, and 5) negative symptoms (e.g., decreased motivation and diminished expressiveness).
For a clinically significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, the level of functioning in one or more major areas (e.g., work, interpersonal relations, or self-care) is markedly below the level achieved before onset; when the onset is in childhood or adolescence, the expected level of interpersonal, academic, or occupational functioning is not achieved.
Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for a period of at least 6 months, which must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated); prodromal symptoms often precede the active phase, and residual symptoms may follow it, characterized by mild or subthreshold forms of hallucinations or delusions.
Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features have been ruled out because either no major depressive, manic, or mixed episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms or any mood episodes that have occurred during active-phase symptoms have been present for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness.
The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse or a medication) or another medical condition. If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication disorder of childhood onset, the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if prominent delusions or hallucinations, in addition to the other required symptoms or schizophrenia, are also present for at least 1 month (or less if successfully treated).
In addition to the symptom domain areas identified in the first diagnostic criterion, assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for distinguishing between schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders.
Marder SR, Cannon TD. Schizophrenia. N Engl J Med. 2019;381(18):1753-1761. [Medline]
Agarwal V, Maheshwari S, Agarwal V, Kalra ID. Simple Schizophrenia Remains a Complicated Diagnosis: Case Report and Literature Review. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2016;204(1):57-60. [Medline]
Created Dec 09, 2019.
Related Posts DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Anorexia NervosaA. Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weight for age… DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Alcohol DependenceA maladaptive pattern of alcohol use, leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested… Diagnostic Criteria for Tuberculosis DiseaseDefinite diagnosis Clinical picture consistent with tuberculosis; bacteriologic confirmation (culture, gene probe/NAA + AFB smear);… DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Major Depressive DisorderThe diagnostic criteria for major depression in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,… DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Panic AttackA discrete period of intense fear or discomfort, in which four (or more) of the…
DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Anorexia NervosaA. Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weight for age…
DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Anorexia NervosaA. Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weight for age…
A. Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weight for age…
DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Alcohol DependenceA maladaptive pattern of alcohol use, leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested…
DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Alcohol DependenceA maladaptive pattern of alcohol use, leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested…
A maladaptive pattern of alcohol use, leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested…
Diagnostic Criteria for Tuberculosis DiseaseDefinite diagnosis Clinical picture consistent with tuberculosis; bacteriologic confirmation (culture, gene probe/NAA + AFB smear);…
Diagnostic Criteria for Tuberculosis DiseaseDefinite diagnosis Clinical picture consistent with tuberculosis; bacteriologic confirmation (culture, gene probe/NAA + AFB smear);…
Definite diagnosis Clinical picture consistent with tuberculosis; bacteriologic confirmation (culture, gene probe/NAA + AFB smear);…
DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Major Depressive DisorderThe diagnostic criteria for major depression in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,…
DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Major Depressive DisorderThe diagnostic criteria for major depression in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,…
The diagnostic criteria for major depression in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,…
DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Panic AttackA discrete period of intense fear or discomfort, in which four (or more) of the…
DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria for Panic AttackA discrete period of intense fear or discomfort, in which four (or more) of the…
A discrete period of intense fear or discomfort, in which four (or more) of the…
Posted in Psychiatry Tags: Criteria, criterios, Diagnostic, diagnostico, DSM, DSM-5, Esquizofrenia, Schizophrenia
Posted in Psychiatry
Tags: Criteria, criterios, Diagnostic, diagnostico, DSM, DSM-5, Esquizofrenia, Schizophrenia
Language: Español English Users Online165 Users OnlineSearch Search for Medical DisclaimerEl contenido de este sitio web son solo para fines informativos y no reemplazan la consulta con un profesional médico. Recent Posts Red Flags in Headache Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) Scale Rosemont Criteria for Chronic Pancreatitis Diagnostic Criteria for Idiopathic Multicentric Castleman Disease (iMCD) Diagnostic Criteria of Lipedema Categories About Us (1) Criteria (635) Allergy (3) Anesthesiology (5) Cardiology (55) Critical Care (17) Dermatology (7) Diabetes (14) Endocrinology and Metabolism (21) Epidemiology (6) Family Practice (7) Gastroenterology (64) Hematology (41) Immumology (6) Infectious Disease (44) Internal Medicine (1) Nephrology (17) Neurology (81) Nutrition (30) Obstetrics & Gynecology (21) Oncology (13) Ophthalmology (4) Orthopedic (5) Otolaryngology (5) Pathologic (1) Pediatrics (14) Pharmacology (3) Physical Therapists (7) Psychiatry (51) Pulmonary (23) Radiology (5) Rheumatology (52) Surgery (8) Urology (5) Links (6)
Language: Español English
Users Online165 Users Online
165 Users Online
Search Search for
Medical DisclaimerEl contenido de este sitio web son solo para fines informativos y no reemplazan la consulta con un profesional médico.
El contenido de este sitio web son solo para fines informativos y no reemplazan la consulta con un profesional médico.
Recent Posts Red Flags in Headache Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) Scale Rosemont Criteria for Chronic Pancreatitis Diagnostic Criteria for Idiopathic Multicentric Castleman Disease (iMCD) Diagnostic Criteria of Lipedema
Red Flags in Headache
Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) Scale
Rosemont Criteria for Chronic Pancreatitis
Diagnostic Criteria for Idiopathic Multicentric Castleman Disease (iMCD)
Diagnostic Criteria of Lipedema
Categories About Us (1) Criteria (635) Allergy (3) Anesthesiology (5) Cardiology (55) Critical Care (17) Dermatology (7) Diabetes (14) Endocrinology and Metabolism (21) Epidemiology (6) Family Practice (7) Gastroenterology (64) Hematology (41) Immumology (6) Infectious Disease (44) Internal Medicine (1) Nephrology (17) Neurology (81) Nutrition (30) Obstetrics & Gynecology (21) Oncology (13) Ophthalmology (4) Orthopedic (5) Otolaryngology (5) Pathologic (1) Pediatrics (14) Pharmacology (3) Physical Therapists (7) Psychiatry (51) Pulmonary (23) Radiology (5) Rheumatology (52) Surgery (8) Urology (5) Links (6)
About Us (1)
Criteria (635) Allergy (3) Anesthesiology (5) Cardiology (55) Critical Care (17) Dermatology (7) Diabetes (14) Endocrinology and Metabolism (21) Epidemiology (6) Family Practice (7) Gastroenterology (64) Hematology (41) Immumology (6) Infectious Disease (44) Internal Medicine (1) Nephrology (17) Neurology (81) Nutrition (30) Obstetrics & Gynecology (21) Oncology (13) Ophthalmology (4) Orthopedic (5) Otolaryngology (5) Pathologic (1) Pediatrics (14) Pharmacology (3) Physical Therapists (7) Psychiatry (51) Pulmonary (23) Radiology (5) Rheumatology (52) Surgery (8) Urology (5)
Critical Care (17)
Endocrinology and Metabolism (21)
Family Practice (7)
Infectious Disease (44)
Internal Medicine (1)
Obstetrics & Gynecology (21)
Physical Therapists (7)
Copyright by MedicalCriteria.com
Last Updated on 4 August, 2021 by Guillermo Firman
Last Updated on 4 August, 2021 by Guillermo Firman