We are moving back to in-person meetings. Email David Larson for more information.
We are moving back to in-person meetings. Email David Larson for more information.
About Become a Member Contact Us Programs For Individuals Crisis Information Share and Care Support Group Ask the Doctor Hour NAMI Connection NAMI Peer-to-Peer For Family Members Ask the Doctor Hour Share and Care Support Group NAMI Family Support Group NAMI Basics NAMI Family-to-Family NAMI Homefront For Community Members Mental Health First Aid NAMI Provider NAMI In Our Own Voice For Schools NAMI Ending the Silence OK2TALK Say It Out Loud For Veterans NAMI Homefront NAMI Connection For Workplaces StigmaFree Company For Faith Leaders NAMI FaithNet Bridges of Hope NAMI Sharing Hope All Classes All Presentations All Support Groups Resources Crisis Information Support Groups Understanding Mental Illness Mental Illnesses News Event Calendar Media Events NAMIWalks National Minority Mental Health Awareness Month Candlelight Service Get Involved Donate Volunteer Become a Member Advocacy Get Help Crisis Information Treatment Medication Resources Hospitalization Resource Guide-English Resource Guide-Español
Suicide Prevention Hotline: 1-800-273-8255 Suicide Text: 741741 Crisis Hotline: (316) 660-7500
Suicide Prevention Hotline: 1-800-273-8255
Suicide Prevention Hotline:
Suicide Text: 741741
Crisis Hotline: (316) 660-7500
Resource Guide English Resource Guide Español Donate
Your Name Email Your Phone Your Website URL Your Message
Understanding Mental Illness If you have a mental health condition, you’re not alone. One in 5 American adults experiences some form of mental illness in any given year. And across the population, 1 in every 25 adults is living with a serious mental health condition such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder or long-term recurring major depression. As with other serious illnesses, mental illness is not your fault or that of the people around you, but widespread misunderstandings about mental illness remain. Many people don’t seek treatment or remain unaware that their symptoms could be connected to a mental health condition. People may expect a person with serious mental illness to look visibly different from others, and they may tell someone who doesn’t “look ill” to “get over it” through willpower. These misperceptions add to the challenges of living with a mental health condition. Every year people overcome the challenges of mental illness to do the things they enjoy. Through developing and following a treatment plan, you can dramatically reduce many of your symptoms. People with mental health conditions can and do pursue higher education, succeed in their careers, make friends and have relationships. Mental illness can slow us down, but we don’t need to let it stop us. Diagnosed with a Mental Health Condition Unlike diabetes or cancer there is no medical test that can provide a diagnosis of mental illness, but getting a diagnosis is a useful step in receiving effective treatment and improving your quality of life. Understanding Your Diagnosis Some people with mental health conditions experience relief and hope when they get a diagnosis. Others may feel like a diagnosis is “just words,” but getting a diagnosis is a useful step in receiving effective treatment and improving your quality of life. More Understanding Health Insurance Insurance is a crucial tool that can grant access to needed treatment to get well. Getting insured may seem like a complicated process, but knowing the basics can help you find coverage. More Finding a Mental Health Professional Finding a mental health professional that works well with you isn’t always easy. Here are some ideas to help you pick the right one. More What to Do in a Crisis If you are thinking of harming yourself or others, or are having thoughts of suicide, don’t be afraid to speak openly and honestly if you need help. You are not alone and there is support available. More Taking Care of Yourself Every year people overcome the challenges of mental illness to do the things they enjoy. Through developing and following a treatment plan, you can dramatically reduce many of your symptoms. Taking Care of Your Body It’s crucial that you advocate for your own health so you can receive the best care possible. More Romantic Relationships When you’re living with a mental health condition, you may wonder whether or not to talk about it with your significant other. Here are a few questions that you may be asking yourself. More Faith & Spirituality Learn how faith and spirituality can help your recovery, what makes a good faith community and how you can help your faith community be more open to people with mental health conditions. More Disclosing to Others Talking with others about your condition can be beneficial for your relationships. Thinking about who you should talk to and how you share this information can help you build a network of support. More Navigating Finances and Work Living with mental illness can sometimes lead to challenges balancing work, finances and home life. Finding a stable job and housing can help you on your path to recovery. Succeeding at Work A mental health condition shouldn’t be a barrier to having and keeping a job. Discover what accommodations you can ask for and how to ask for them to help you succeed. More Finding Stable Housing For someone with a mental health condition, the basic necessity of a stable home can be hard to come by. The lack of safe and affordable housing is one of the most powerful barriers to recovery. More Getting Help Paying for Medications Paying for medication out of pocket can be very expensive. Learn ways to help you cover the costs. More Additional Support Depending on your needs and circumstances, additional benefits and supports may be available to you through government, public and private systems. Reentry After a Period of Incarceration You’re leaving prison soon, so it’s important to plan for a successful transition. You should start planning for your release several months before your release date. More Social Security Disability Benefits Some people living with a mental health condition find that there are periods of time when working becomes too difficult. Fortunately, there are two programs run by the Social Security Administration that provide monthly income and health insurance for people unable to work.
Understanding Mental Illness
Understanding Mental Illness
If you have a mental health condition, you’re not alone. One in 5 American adults experiences some form of mental illness in any given year. And across the population, 1 in every 25 adults is living with a serious mental health condition such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder or long-term recurring major depression.
As with other serious illnesses, mental illness is not your fault or that of the people around you, but widespread misunderstandings about mental illness remain. Many people don’t seek treatment or remain unaware that their symptoms could be connected to a mental health condition. People may expect a person with serious mental illness to look visibly different from others, and they may tell someone who doesn’t “look ill” to “get over it” through willpower. These misperceptions add to the challenges of living with a mental health condition.
Every year people overcome the challenges of mental illness to do the things they enjoy. Through developing and following a treatment plan, you can dramatically reduce many of your symptoms. People with mental health conditions can and do pursue higher education, succeed in their careers, make friends and have relationships. Mental illness can slow us down, but we don’t need to let it stop us.
Diagnosed with a Mental Health Condition
Unlike diabetes or cancer there is no medical test that can provide a diagnosis of mental illness, but getting a diagnosis is a useful step in receiving effective treatment and improving your quality of life.
Understanding Your Diagnosis Some people with mental health conditions experience relief and hope when they get a diagnosis. Others may feel like a diagnosis is “just words,” but getting a diagnosis is a useful step in receiving effective treatment and improving your quality of life. More Understanding Health Insurance Insurance is a crucial tool that can grant access to needed treatment to get well. Getting insured may seem like a complicated process, but knowing the basics can help you find coverage. More Finding a Mental Health Professional Finding a mental health professional that works well with you isn’t always easy. Here are some ideas to help you pick the right one. More
Understanding Your Diagnosis Some people with mental health conditions experience relief and hope when they get a diagnosis. Others may feel like a diagnosis is “just words,” but getting a diagnosis is a useful step in receiving effective treatment and improving your quality of life. More
Understanding Your Diagnosis
Some people with mental health conditions experience relief and hope when they get a diagnosis. Others may feel like a diagnosis is “just words,” but getting a diagnosis is a useful step in receiving effective treatment and improving your quality of life.
Understanding Health Insurance Insurance is a crucial tool that can grant access to needed treatment to get well. Getting insured may seem like a complicated process, but knowing the basics can help you find coverage. More
Understanding Health Insurance
Insurance is a crucial tool that can grant access to needed treatment to get well. Getting insured may seem like a complicated process, but knowing the basics can help you find coverage.
Finding a Mental Health Professional Finding a mental health professional that works well with you isn’t always easy. Here are some ideas to help you pick the right one. More
Finding a Mental Health Professional
Finding a mental health professional that works well with you isn’t always easy. Here are some ideas to help you pick the right one.
What to Do in a Crisis
If you are thinking of harming yourself or others, or are having thoughts of suicide, don’t be afraid to speak openly and honestly if you need help. You are not alone and there is support available. More
Taking Care of Yourself
Every year people overcome the challenges of mental illness to do the things they enjoy. Through developing and following a treatment plan, you can dramatically reduce many of your symptoms.
Taking Care of Your Body It’s crucial that you advocate for your own health so you can receive the best care possible. More Romantic Relationships When you’re living with a mental health condition, you may wonder whether or not to talk about it with your significant other. Here are a few questions that you may be asking yourself. More Faith & Spirituality Learn how faith and spirituality can help your recovery, what makes a good faith community and how you can help your faith community be more open to people with mental health conditions. More
Taking Care of Your Body It’s crucial that you advocate for your own health so you can receive the best care possible. More
Taking Care of Your Body
It’s crucial that you advocate for your own health so you can receive the best care possible.
Romantic Relationships When you’re living with a mental health condition, you may wonder whether or not to talk about it with your significant other. Here are a few questions that you may be asking yourself. More
When you’re living with a mental health condition, you may wonder whether or not to talk about it with your significant other. Here are a few questions that you may be asking yourself.
Faith & Spirituality Learn how faith and spirituality can help your recovery, what makes a good faith community and how you can help your faith community be more open to people with mental health conditions. More
Faith & Spirituality
Learn how faith and spirituality can help your recovery, what makes a good faith community and how you can help your faith community be more open to people with mental health conditions.
Disclosing to Others
Talking with others about your condition can be beneficial for your relationships. Thinking about who you should talk to and how you share this information can help you build a network of support. More
Navigating Finances and Work
Living with mental illness can sometimes lead to challenges balancing work, finances and home life. Finding a stable job and housing can help you on your path to recovery.
Succeeding at Work A mental health condition shouldn’t be a barrier to having and keeping a job. Discover what accommodations you can ask for and how to ask for them to help you succeed. More Finding Stable Housing For someone with a mental health condition, the basic necessity of a stable home can be hard to come by. The lack of safe and affordable housing is one of the most powerful barriers to recovery. More Getting Help Paying for Medications Paying for medication out of pocket can be very expensive. Learn ways to help you cover the costs. More
Succeeding at Work A mental health condition shouldn’t be a barrier to having and keeping a job. Discover what accommodations you can ask for and how to ask for them to help you succeed. More
Succeeding at Work
A mental health condition shouldn’t be a barrier to having and keeping a job. Discover what accommodations you can ask for and how to ask for them to help you succeed.
Finding Stable Housing For someone with a mental health condition, the basic necessity of a stable home can be hard to come by. The lack of safe and affordable housing is one of the most powerful barriers to recovery. More
Finding Stable Housing
For someone with a mental health condition, the basic necessity of a stable home can be hard to come by. The lack of safe and affordable housing is one of the most powerful barriers to recovery.
Getting Help Paying for Medications Paying for medication out of pocket can be very expensive. Learn ways to help you cover the costs. More
Getting Help Paying for Medications
Paying for medication out of pocket can be very expensive. Learn ways to help you cover the costs.
Depending on your needs and circumstances, additional benefits and supports may be available to you through government, public and private systems.
Reentry After a Period of Incarceration You’re leaving prison soon, so it’s important to plan for a successful transition. You should start planning for your release several months before your release date. More Social Security Disability Benefits Some people living with a mental health condition find that there are periods of time when working becomes too difficult. Fortunately, there are two programs run by the Social Security Administration that provide monthly income and health insurance for people unable to work.
Reentry After a Period of Incarceration You’re leaving prison soon, so it’s important to plan for a successful transition. You should start planning for your release several months before your release date. More
Reentry After a Period of Incarceration
You’re leaving prison soon, so it’s important to plan for a successful transition. You should start planning for your release several months before your release date.
Social Security Disability Benefits Some people living with a mental health condition find that there are periods of time when working becomes too difficult. Fortunately, there are two programs run by the Social Security Administration that provide monthly income and health insurance for people unable to work.
Social Security Disability Benefits
Some people living with a mental health condition find that there are periods of time when working becomes too difficult. Fortunately, there are two programs run by the Social Security Administration that provide monthly income and health insurance for people unable to work.
ResourcesMental Illnesses Understanding Mental Illness Crisis Information News Support Groups Event Calendar Media Help in a Crisis National Suicide Prevention Lifeline: 1-800-273-8255 Crisis Text Line: Text NAMI to 741741 to connect with a trained crisis counselor to receive free, 24/7 crisis support via text message. NAMI HelpLine: 1-800-950-6264 M–F, 9 a.m.–5 p.m. (central time) for free mental health information, referrals and support. COMCARE Hotline: (316) 660-7500
Mental Illnesses Understanding Mental Illness Crisis Information News Support Groups Event Calendar Media
Help in a Crisis
National Suicide Prevention Lifeline: 1-800-273-8255 Crisis Text Line: Text NAMI to 741741 to connect with a trained crisis counselor to receive free, 24/7 crisis support via text message. NAMI HelpLine: 1-800-950-6264 M–F, 9 a.m.–5 p.m. (central time) for free mental health information, referrals and support. COMCARE Hotline: (316) 660-7500
National Suicide Prevention Lifeline: 1-800-273-8255
Crisis Text Line: Text NAMI to 741741 to connect with a trained crisis counselor to receive free, 24/7 crisis support via text message.
NAMI HelpLine: 1-800-950-6264 M–F, 9 a.m.–5 p.m. (central time) for free mental health information, referrals and support.
COMCARE Hotline: (316) 660-7500
© 2024 , All Rights Reserved. Sitemap Privacy Policy Website design and development by Balefire Marketing + Advertising
© 2024 , All Rights Reserved. Sitemap Privacy Policy
© 2024 , All Rights Reserved.
Website design and development by Balefire Marketing + Advertising
NAMI Wichita|P.O. Box 2435|Wichita, KS 67201|(316) 686-1373|[email protected]
NAMI Wichita|P.O. Box 2435|Wichita, KS 67201|(316) 686-1373|[email protected]
This site uses cookies. By continuing to browse this site you are agreeing to our use of cookies. View our Privacy Policy.
This site uses cookies. By continuing to browse this site you are agreeing to our use of cookies. View our Privacy Policy.