 
The Interconnectedness of Physical and 
Mental Health 
Overview 
A strong association exists between the physical 
body and the mental wellbeing of an individual, 
sometimes referred to as the mind-body connection.7 
There are significant correlations between the 
presence of physical health conditions, such as 
diabetes, hypertension, arthritis, and heart disease, 
and mental health conditions, such as anxiety, 
depression, panic disorder, and post-traumatic stress 
disorder.5 
Mental and physical health have a bi-directional 
relationship, meaning that mental health affects 
physical health and physical health affects mental 
health.7 Because of this reciprocal relationship, it is 
extremely important that both aspects of health are 
properly addressed and considered when 
conducting assessments and providing treatment to 
individuals. In one study, it was found that among 
adults with co-occurring chronic physical and mental 
health conditions, 10% of the effects of past 
physical health issues could be attributed to mental 
health factors. In the same study, 8% of past mental 
health issues could be explained by physical health 
factors.6   
Although the two are highly interconnected, many 
health professionals do not work in a holistic manner, 
which considers how both physical and mental health 
may determine the level of an individual’s wellness 
and may alter associated treatment options. For 
example, some medical professionals believe that 
mental health conditions are simply a consequence 
of poor physical health and do not require focused 
medical attention on their own.8 Additionally, some 
mental health clinicians believe that treating mental 
illness presents significant challenges to which 
physical health issues are of lesser importance, which 
are then not addressed properly or at all.1 
The relationship between physical and mental health 
is often cyclical in nature, and each aspect of health 
can worsen if both are not addressed properly. For 
example, depression can have significant negative 
metabolic effects on the body, which may cause an 
individual to develop type 2 diabetes over time, 
especially if they are already at risk via family 
history, body mass index, or poor diet. The 
associated stress from the lifestyle changes that are 
necessary to manage diabetes, along with the 
potential financial burden of purchasing medication, 
may cause the individual’s depression to worsen, thus 
creating a harmful cycle which exacerbates each 
condition.10 Furthermore, if an individual has a 
chronic physical condition which causes significant 
pain or discomfort, such as fibromyalgia, they are 
more likely to develop depression, which can make it 
harder for the individual to adhere to treatment 
plans or cope with the physical pain, again 
worsening each condition.9 
The Effect of Diagnostic Overshadowing on 
Physical Health Treatment 
Although the American medical system is slowly 
beginning to make a paradigm shift towards 
integrative care, which considers the whole person, 
stigma associated with disability and mental health 
continue to hinder proper treatment for many 
individuals. People with disabilities frequently 
experience diagnostic overshadowing in clinical 
settings This means the presence of their disability is 
the main focal point for clinicians and, as such, most 
health issues are simply attributed to their disability 
status, rather than a separate or underlying health 
issue.1 Diagnostic overshadowing also applies to 
patients with mental health diagnoses with and 
without disabilities. When individuals with mental 
health conditions present with a physical ailment, 
they often report disparities in treatment as physical 
complaints are misattributed to their mental health 
diagnoses, meaning patients are made to believe 
their physical discomfort is “all in their heads.”8 This 
lack of proper care is hypothesized to be one of 

 
several reasons why individuals with mental health 
diagnoses have higher rates of physical illness and 
experience increased rates of premature mortality 
compared to the general population.3, 4 Given the 
diagnostic overshadowing which hinders proper 
medical care among individuals with disabilities and 
people living with mental health diagnoses 
independently, the likelihood of physical health 
mistreatment among people with co-occurring 
disabilities and mental health diagnoses is likely 
much more prevalent and problematic. 
Conclusion 
In order to ensure that people with disabilities 
and/or people with mental health diagnoses receive 
proper care, patients need to be evaluated and 
treated in a holistic manner. The attribution of 
physical health symptoms to psychiatric or cognitive 
differences can lead to significant delays in proper 
care as well as frustration on the patients’ behalf 
and potential worsening of both physical and mental 
health status. 
Contributor 
Danielle Augustin, MS, CHWS 
References 
1. Afia A., Scior K., Ratti V., Strydom A., King A. 
(2013). Discrimination and Other Barriers to 
Accessing Health Care: Perspectives of 
Patients with Mild and Moderate Intellectual 
Disability and Their Carers. PloS one. 8(8): 
e70855. 
2. Druss B.G., Walker E.R. (2011). Mental 
disorders and medical co-morbidity. 
Research Synthesis Report no. 21. Princeton, 
NJ: RobertWood Johnson Foundation.  
3. Laursen T.M., Munk-Olsen T., Gasse C. 
(2011) Chronic somatic comorbidity and 
excess mortality due to natural causes in 
persons with schizophrenia or bipolar 
affective disorder. PLoS One 6(9): e24597.  
4. Laursen T.M., Nordentoft M., Mortensen P.B. 
(2013) Excess Early Mortality in 
Schizophrenia. Annu. Rev Clin Psychol 10: 
5.1–5.24.  
5. Niles A. N., Dour H. J., Stanton, A. L., Roy-
Byrne, P. P., Stein, M. B., Sullivan, G., 
Sherbourne, C. D., Rose, R. D., Craske, M. G. 
(2015). Anxiety and depressive symptoms 
and medical illness among adults with 
anxiety disorders. Journal of Psychosomatic 
Research, 78 (2), 109-115. 
6. Ohrnberger, Julius, Fichera, Eleonora, & 
Sutton, Matt. (2017). The relationship 
between physical and mental health: A 
mediation analysis. Social Science & 
Medicine, 195, 42-49. 
7. Sewell C.A., Martin J.S., Abel W.D. (2012). 
Psychiatric co-morbidity: revisiting the "mind-
body" connection. West Indian Med J., 61(2), 
115-6.  
8. Shefer, G., Henderson, C., Howard, L. M., 
Murray, J., & Thornicroft, G. (2014). 
Diagnostic overshadowing and other 
challenges involved in the diagnostic process 
of patients with mental illness who present in 
emergency departments with physical 
symptoms--a qualitative study. PloS one, 
9(11).  
9. Singh, G., & Kaul, S. (2018). Anxiety and 
depression are common in fibromyalgia 
patients and correlate with symptom severity 
score. Indian Journal of Rheumatology, 
13(3), 168-172. 
10. Tabák, A.G., Akbaraly, T.N., Batty, D., 
Kivimäki, M (2014). Depression and type 2 
diabetes: a causal association?, The Lancet 
Diabetes & Endocrinology, 2(3), 236-245. 
Check us out on Social Media! 
 @MHDDcenter 
 @MHDDcenter 
 @MHDDcenter 
 MHDD National Training Center 
 

